doc/standard-syllable-structure.md, before:

## Standard Tibetan Syllable Structure

This document describes the syllable structure of standard Tibetan. It is made from a computer engineering point of view, and tries to include all cases. This document aims at standardizing the vocabulary used to describe the different syllable parts, and to help parsing and validating standard Tibetan.

The syllable is composed of (in this order):
- zero or one prefix
- a main stack, composed of:
  - zero or one subscript letter
  - one main letter
  - zero or one subscript letter
  - zero or one second subscript letter
  - zero or one explicit vowel
- zero or one suffix
- zero or one second suffix
- zero or one grammatical suffixes

### Reference

The reference book on this is བོད་གངས་ཅན་གྱི་སྒྲ་རིག་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ལེ་ཚན་འགའ་ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་བཞུགས་སོ། (ISBN 7-5420-1026-3) by ཚེ་ཏན་ཞབས་དྲུང་. The author of this page doesn't have a direct access to this book. It is hereafter referenced to as TSH.

We also used Manuel de Tibétain Standard by Nicolas Tournadre, hereafter referenced to as NT.

### Prefixes

A prefix can be:

- ག
- ད
- བ
- མ
- འ

### Main stack

#### superscript letter

A subscript letter is written above the main letter. For example རྒ decomposes in subscript ར above main letter ག.

Subscript letters are (combination with main letter ཀ in parenthesis)

- ར (རྐ)
- ལ (ལྐ)
- ས (སྐ)

#### main letter

The main letter can be any of the standard tibetan consonants (ཀ, ཁ, ག, ང, ཅ, ཆ, ཇ, ཉ, ཏ, ཐ, ད, ན, པ, ཕ, བ, མ, ཙ, ཚ, ཛ, ཝ, ཞ, ཟ, འ, ཡ, ར, ལ, ཤ, ས, ཧ, ཨ).

### subscript letter

Subscript letters are written below the main letter. They are (combination with main letter ཀ in parenthesis):

- ཡ (ཀྱ)
- ར (ཀྲ)
- ལ (ཀླ)
- ཝ (ཀྭ)

### second subscript letter

The second subscript letter appears under the first subscript, it cannot appear without a first subscript. It can only be ཝ.

### Explicit vowels

Explicit vowels appear on top or bottom of the main stack. At most one explicit vowel appears per syllable. Explicit vowels are (combined with ཀ):

- ཀི
- ཀོ
- ཀེ
- ཀུ

## Suffix

A suffix can appear after the main stack, it can be:

- ག
- ང
- ད
- ན
- བ
- མ
- འ
- འུ
- འི (extremely rare, as in ཀྭའི་)
- འོ (extremely rare, as in བྲའོ་ or སླེའོ་)
- ར
- ལ
- ས

## Second suffix

The second suffix ས can appear only after a suffix.

## Grammatical suffixes

The following grammatical suffixes can appear if the syllable have no suffix, suffix འུ, འོ, འི or འ (suffix འ disappears, others not) :

- འི
- འིས
- འོ
- འང
- འམ
- ར
- ས

## Constraints

For a Tibetan syllable to be valid, it must respect a few constraints:

### Constraints on superscript and subscript letters

The only valid combinations of superscript + main + subscript + second subscript letters are:

- the main letters without superscript nor subscript nor second subscript letters
- the following stacks:
  - རྐ རྒ རྔ རྗ རྙ རྟ རྡ རྣ རྦ རྨ རྩ རྫ
  - ལྐ ལྒ ལྔ ལྕ ལྗ ལྟ ལྡ ལྤ ལྦ ལྷ
  - སྐ སྒ སྔ སྙ སྟ སྡ སྣ སྤ སྦ སྨ སྩ
  - ཀྭ ཁྭ གྭ ཉྭ ཏྭ དྭ ཙྭ ཚྭ ཞྭ ཟྭ རྭ ལྭ ཤྭ སྭ ཧྭ
  - ཀྱ ཁྱ གྱ པྱ ཕྱ བྱ མྱ
  - ཀྲ ཁྲ གྲ ཏྲ ཐྲ དྲ པྲ ཕྲ བྲ མྲ ཤྲ སྲ ཧྲ
  - ཀླ གླ བླ ཟླ རླ སླ
  - རྐྱ རྒྱ རྨྱ
  - སྐྱ སྒྱ སྤྱ སྦྱ སྨྱ
  - སྐྲ སྒྲ སྣྲ སྤྲ སྦྲ སྨྲ
  - གྲྭ རྩྭ ཕྱྭ

The source is [the list by Chris Fynn](https://sites.google.com/site/chrisfynn2/home/tibetanscriptfonts/thetibetanwritingsystem/tibetanlettercombinations), merged with NT and TSH.

Note that TSH doesn't list ཏྭ, ཙྭ, སྭ, མྲ nor ཤྲ.

### Constraints on prefix and superscript letter

The only valid combinations of prefix + superscript letter + main letter + subscript + second subscript are (in alphabetical order): 

  - ཀ ཀྭ ཀྱ ཀྲ ཀླ དཀ དཀྭ དཀྱ དཀྲ དཀླ བཀ བཀྭ བཀྱ བཀྲ བཀླ རྐ རྐྱ ལྐ སྐ སྐྱ སྐྲ བརྐ བརྐྱ བསྐ བསྐྱ བསྐྲ
  - ཁ ཁྭ ཁྱ ཁྲ མཁ མཁྭ མཁྱ མཁྲ འཁ འཁྭ འཁྱ འཁྲ
  - ག གྭ གྱ གྲ གྲྭ གླ དག དགྭ དགྱ དགྲ དགྲྭ བག བགྭ བགྱ བགྲ བགྲྭ བགླ མག མགྭ མགྱ མགྲ མགྲྭ འག འགྭ འགྱ འགྲ འགྲྭ རྒ རྒྱ ལྒ སྒ སྒྱ སྒྲ བརྒ བརྒྱ བསྒ བསྒྱ བསྒྲ
  - ང དང མང རྔ ལྔ སྔ བརྔ བསྔ
  - ཅ གཅ བཅ
  - ཆ མཆ འཆ
  - ཇ མཇ འཇ རྗ ལྗ བརྗ
  - ཉ ཉྭ གཉ གཉྭ མཉ མཉྭ རྙ སྙ བརྙ བསྙ
  - ཏ ཏྭ ཏྲ གཏ གཏྭ གཏྲ བཏ བཏྭ བཏྲ རྟ ལྟ སྟ བརྟ བལྟ བསྟ
  - ཐ ཐྲ མཐ འཐ
  - ད དྭ དྲ གད གདྭ བད བདྭ མད མདྭ མདྲ འད འདྭ འདྲ རྡ ལྡ སྡ བརྡ བལྡ བསྡ
  - ན གན མན རྣ སྣ སྣྲ བརྣ བསྣ
  - པ པྱ པྲ དཔ དཔྱ དཔྲ ལྤ སྤ སྤྱ སྤྲ
  - ཕ ཕྱ ཕྱྭ ཕྲ འཕ འཕྱ འཕྱྭ འཕྲ
  - བ བྱ བྲ བླ དབ དབྱ དབྲ འབ འབྱ འབྲ རྦ ལྦ སྦ སྦྱ སྦྲ
  - མ མྱ མྲ དམ དམྱ དམྲ རྨ རྨྱ སྨ སྨྱ སྨྲ
  - ཙ ཙྭ གཙ གཙྭ བཙ བཙྭ རྩ རྩྭ སྩ བརྩ བརྩྭ བསྩ
  - ཚ ཚྭ མཚ མཚྭ འཚ འཚྭ
  - ཛ མཛ འཛ རྫ བརྫ
  - ཝ
  - ཞ ཞྭ གཞ གཞྭ བཞ བཞྭ
  - ཟ ཟྭ ཟླ གཟ བཟ བཟྭ བཟླ
  - འ
  - ཡ གཡ
  - ར རྭ རླ བརླ
  - ལ ལྭ
  - ཤ ཤྭ གཤ གཤྭ བཤ བཤྭ
  - ས སྭ སྲ སླ གས གསྭ བས བསྭ བསྲ བསླ
  - ཧ ཧྭ ཧྲ ལྷ
  - ཨ

TSH does not include བགླ nor མདྲ in his list, but lists them as exceptions for བགླ་ and མདྲོན་. The wasurs were also added by the author of this document, not all possibilities might be possible.

### Constraints on suffix and second suffix

The second suffix ས can only appear after the following suffixes:

- ག
- ང
- བ
- མ

The second suffix ད (extremely rare) can only appear after the following suffixes:

- ན
- ར
- ལ

### Simplification of contraints on suffixes

Mixing suffix, second suffix and grammatical suffix, the following can appear after the main stack:

- ག
- ང
- ད
- ན
- བ
- མ
- འ
- འུ
- ར
- ལ
- ས
- གས
- ངས
- བས
- མས
- ནད (extremely rare)
- རད (extremely rare)
- ལད (extremely rare)
- འི
- འིས
- འོ
- འང
- འམ
- འུའི
- འུའིས
- འུའོ
- འུའང
- འུའམ
- འུར
- འུས
- འིའི  (extremely rare)
- འིའིས  (extremely rare)
- འིའོ  (extremely rare)
- འིའང  (extremely rare)
- འིའམ  (extremely rare)
- འིར  (extremely rare)
- འོའི  (extremely rare)
- འོའིས  (extremely rare)
- འོའོ  (extremely rare)
- འོའང  (extremely rare)
- འོའམ  (extremely rare)
- འོར  (extremely rare)
- འོས  (extremely rare)

Commit message:

add experimental rule on ashung suffix

doc/standard-syllable-structure.md, after:

## Standard Tibetan Syllable Structure

This document describes the syllable structure of standard Tibetan. It is made from a computer engineering point of view, and tries to include all cases. This document aims at standardizing the vocabulary used to describe the different syllable parts, and to help parsing and validating standard Tibetan.

The syllable is composed of (in this order):
- zero or one prefix
- a main stack, composed of:
  - zero or one subscript letter
  - one main letter
  - zero or one subscript letter
  - zero or one second subscript letter
  - zero or one explicit vowel
- zero or one suffix
- zero or one second suffix
- zero or one grammatical suffixes

### Reference

The reference book on this is བོད་གངས་ཅན་གྱི་སྒྲ་རིག་པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ལེ་ཚན་འགའ་ཕྱོགས་བསྡུས་བཞུགས་སོ། (ISBN 7-5420-1026-3) by ཚེ་ཏན་ཞབས་དྲུང་. The author of this page doesn't have a direct access to this book. It is hereafter referenced to as TSH.

We also used Manuel de Tibétain Standard by Nicolas Tournadre, hereafter referenced to as NT.

### Prefixes

A prefix can be:

- ག
- ད
- བ
- མ
- འ

### Main stack

#### superscript letter

A subscript letter is written above the main letter. For example རྒ decomposes in subscript ར above main letter ག.

Subscript letters are (combination with main letter ཀ in parenthesis)

- ར (རྐ)
- ལ (ལྐ)
- ས (སྐ)

#### main letter

The main letter can be any of the standard tibetan consonants (ཀ, ཁ, ག, ང, ཅ, ཆ, ཇ, ཉ, ཏ, ཐ, ད, ན, པ, ཕ, བ, མ, ཙ, ཚ, ཛ, ཝ, ཞ, ཟ, འ, ཡ, ར, ལ, ཤ, ས, ཧ, ཨ).

### subscript letter

Subscript letters are written below the main letter. They are (combination with main letter ཀ in parenthesis):

- ཡ (ཀྱ)
- ར (ཀྲ)
- ལ (ཀླ)
- ཝ (ཀྭ)

### second subscript letter

The second subscript letter appears under the first subscript, it cannot appear without a first subscript. It can only be ཝ.

### Explicit vowels

Explicit vowels appear on top or bottom of the main stack. At most one explicit vowel appears per syllable. Explicit vowels are (combined with ཀ):

- ཀི
- ཀོ
- ཀེ
- ཀུ

## Suffix

A suffix can appear after the main stack, it can be:

- ག
- ང
- ད
- ན
- བ
- མ
- འ
- འུ
- འི (extremely rare, as in ཀྭའི་)
- འོ (extremely rare, as in བྲའོ་ or སླེའོ་)
- ར
- ལ
- ས

## Second suffix

The second suffix ས can appear only after a suffix.

## Grammatical suffixes

The following grammatical suffixes can appear if the syllable have no suffix, suffix འུ, འོ, འི or འ (suffix འ disappears, others not) :

- འི
- འིས
- འོ
- འང
- འམ
- ར
- ས

## Constraints

For a Tibetan syllable to be valid, it must respect a few constraints:

### Constraints on superscript and subscript letters

The only valid combinations of superscript + main + subscript + second subscript letters are:

- the main letters without superscript nor subscript nor second subscript letters
- the following stacks:
  - རྐ རྒ རྔ རྗ རྙ རྟ རྡ རྣ རྦ རྨ རྩ རྫ
  - ལྐ ལྒ ལྔ ལྕ ལྗ ལྟ ལྡ ལྤ ལྦ ལྷ
  - སྐ སྒ སྔ སྙ སྟ སྡ སྣ སྤ སྦ སྨ སྩ
  - ཀྭ ཁྭ གྭ ཉྭ ཏྭ དྭ ཙྭ ཚྭ ཞྭ ཟྭ རྭ ལྭ ཤྭ སྭ ཧྭ
  - ཀྱ ཁྱ གྱ པྱ ཕྱ བྱ མྱ
  - ཀྲ ཁྲ གྲ ཏྲ ཐྲ དྲ པྲ ཕྲ བྲ མྲ ཤྲ སྲ ཧྲ
  - ཀླ གླ བླ ཟླ རླ སླ
  - རྐྱ རྒྱ རྨྱ
  - སྐྱ སྒྱ སྤྱ སྦྱ སྨྱ
  - སྐྲ སྒྲ སྣྲ སྤྲ སྦྲ སྨྲ
  - གྲྭ རྩྭ ཕྱྭ

The source is [the list by Chris Fynn](https://sites.google.com/site/chrisfynn2/home/tibetanscriptfonts/thetibetanwritingsystem/tibetanlettercombinations), merged with NT and TSH.

Note that TSH doesn't list ཏྭ, ཙྭ, སྭ, མྲ nor ཤྲ.

### Constraints on prefix and superscript letter

The only valid combinations of prefix + superscript letter + main letter + subscript + second subscript are (in alphabetical order): 

  - ཀ ཀྭ ཀྱ ཀྲ ཀླ དཀ དཀྭ དཀྱ དཀྲ དཀླ བཀ བཀྭ བཀྱ བཀྲ བཀླ རྐ རྐྱ ལྐ སྐ སྐྱ སྐྲ བརྐ བརྐྱ བསྐ བསྐྱ བསྐྲ
  - ཁ ཁྭ ཁྱ ཁྲ མཁ མཁྭ མཁྱ མཁྲ འཁ འཁྭ འཁྱ འཁྲ
  - ག གྭ གྱ གྲ གྲྭ གླ དག དགྭ དགྱ དགྲ དགྲྭ བག བགྭ བགྱ བགྲ བགྲྭ བགླ མག མགྭ མགྱ མགྲ མགྲྭ འག འགྭ འགྱ འགྲ འགྲྭ རྒ རྒྱ ལྒ སྒ སྒྱ སྒྲ བརྒ བརྒྱ བསྒ བསྒྱ བསྒྲ
  - ང དང མང རྔ ལྔ སྔ བརྔ བསྔ
  - ཅ གཅ བཅ
  - ཆ མཆ འཆ
  - ཇ མཇ འཇ རྗ ལྗ བརྗ
  - ཉ ཉྭ གཉ གཉྭ མཉ མཉྭ རྙ སྙ བརྙ བསྙ
  - ཏ ཏྭ ཏྲ གཏ གཏྭ གཏྲ བཏ བཏྭ བཏྲ རྟ ལྟ སྟ བརྟ བལྟ བསྟ
  - ཐ ཐྲ མཐ འཐ
  - ད དྭ དྲ གད གདྭ བད བདྭ མད མདྭ མདྲ འད འདྭ འདྲ རྡ ལྡ སྡ བརྡ བལྡ བསྡ
  - ན གན མན རྣ སྣ སྣྲ བརྣ བསྣ
  - པ པྱ པྲ དཔ དཔྱ དཔྲ ལྤ སྤ སྤྱ སྤྲ
  - ཕ ཕྱ ཕྱྭ ཕྲ འཕ འཕྱ འཕྱྭ འཕྲ
  - བ བྱ བྲ བླ དབ དབྱ དབྲ འབ འབྱ འབྲ རྦ ལྦ སྦ སྦྱ སྦྲ
  - མ མྱ མྲ དམ དམྱ དམྲ རྨ རྨྱ སྨ སྨྱ སྨྲ
  - ཙ ཙྭ གཙ གཙྭ བཙ བཙྭ རྩ རྩྭ སྩ བརྩ བརྩྭ བསྩ
  - ཚ ཚྭ མཚ མཚྭ འཚ འཚྭ
  - ཛ མཛ འཛ རྫ བརྫ
  - ཝ
  - ཞ ཞྭ གཞ གཞྭ བཞ བཞྭ
  - ཟ ཟྭ ཟླ གཟ བཟ བཟྭ བཟླ
  - འ
  - ཡ གཡ
  - ར རྭ རླ བརླ
  - ལ ལྭ
  - ཤ ཤྭ གཤ གཤྭ བཤ བཤྭ
  - ས སྭ སྲ སླ གས གསྭ བས བསྭ བསྲ བསླ
  - ཧ ཧྭ ཧྲ ལྷ
  - ཨ

TSH does not include བགླ nor མདྲ in his list, but lists them as exceptions for བགླ་ and མདྲོན་. The wasurs were also added by the author of this document, not all possibilities might be possible.

### Constraints on suffix and second suffix

The second suffix ས can only appear after the following suffixes:

- ག
- ང
- བ
- མ

The second suffix ད (extremely rare) can only appear after the following suffixes:

- ན
- ར
- ལ

### Constraints on འ suffix

The འ suffix only appears in syllables with:

- one prefix
- zero or one superscript
- no subscript
- no vowel

There seems to be only one case (བརྡའ་) where འ is suffix in a syllable with a superscript letter, so the rule might be "with no superscript", with only this exception. This rule is not documented in grammar books and can be challenged. These rules do not apply to འི, འུ or འོ suffixes.

### Simplification of contraints on suffixes

Mixing suffix, second suffix and grammatical suffix, the following can appear after the main stack:

- ག
- ང
- ད
- ན
- བ
- མ
- འ
- འུ
- ར
- ལ
- ས
- གས
- ངས
- བས
- མས
- ནད (extremely rare)
- རད (extremely rare)
- ལད (extremely rare)
- འི
- འིས
- འོ
- འང
- འམ
- འུའི
- འུའིས
- འུའོ
- འུའང
- འུའམ
- འུར
- འུས
- འིའི  (extremely rare)
- འིའིས  (extremely rare)
- འིའོ  (extremely rare)
- འིའང  (extremely rare)
- འིའམ  (extremely rare)
- འིར  (extremely rare)
- འོའི  (extremely rare)
- འོའིས  (extremely rare)
- འོའོ  (extremely rare)
- འོའང  (extremely rare)
- འོའམ  (extremely rare)
- འོར  (extremely rare)
- འོས  (extremely rare)
